
# Literals, I/O, and Function Basics

There are two ways to put data into your program. One method is to write the data directly into the code with literals. Another way is to give your program some sort of I/O (Input / Output) so that it can retrieve and send out data on its own.

## Literals

The easiest way to enter data in your problem is through 'literals', which are called as such because they're *literally* written in the source code. All of the basic data types in python have a literal form, all of which allow you to enter values directly into your code. Literals for ints and floats are as simple as just typing in the number. Strings require single or double quotes to be by the interpreter recognized as a string instead of code. Things like lists and tuples are surrounds by brackets or parentheses and have commas inside them to separate the values. You can also use literals to create empty versions of some data types, like strings or lists.

- int literals: `3`, `-20`, `294927`

- float literals: `3.2`, `3.14e-10`

- bool literals: `True` and `False`

- string literals: `'hello'` and `"world"`
  Empty literal: `""` or `''`

- list literals: `[0, 2, 1, 2]`
  Empty literal: `[]`

- tuple literals: `(6, 4, 1, 4)`
  Empty literal: `()`

- dictionary literals `{'key:' 2, 'key_2': 5}`
  Empty literal: `{}`

- set literals `{2, 6, 9, 3}`

## I/O

We're now going to briefly go over functions and introduce two functions that can be used for basic I/O.

### Print

The simplest form of output we have available is the `print` function.

As a quick explanation, functions are pieces of code that are isolated and set aside in such a way that they can be used repeatedly and flexibly. You give functions various values, called parameters, and the function will do something with those parameters.

You use functions like this:

First is the name of the function, in this case `print`, then some parentheses. In those parentheses go the parameters, in this example `'Hello world'`.

```python
#function_name(param1, param2, param3, etc...) the number of parameters depends on the function
print('Hello world!')
>>> Hello world!
```

`print` accepts string values and values that can be turned into strings. It then prints that value onto the terminal.

```python
print('hello')
print(2)
>>> hello
>>> 2
```

`print` also allows you to input multiple different values, and will print them all in one line by default.

```python
name = 'Nick'
score = 1000
print("Total score for", name, "is", score)
```
```
>>> Total score for Nick is 1000
```

### Input

Sometimes functions will also evaluate to something to be used later, like `input`.

The `input` function allows us to prompt the user for input on the terminal. The string that's passed to it determines what's displayed with the prompt.

```python
name = input('what is your name? ')
print('Hello', name, '!')
```
```
>>> what is your name? Joe (((The user types in Joe here)))
>>> Hello Joe!
```

The line `name = input('what is your name? ')` works just like `x = 2 * 8` does. In this case the `input` function will evaluate not mathematically, but to whatever you type into the terminal. So, if we type in `Joe`, the `input` function evaluates to the string `'Joe'` and that value is put into the `name` variable just like `2 * 8` evaluates to `16` and is put in `x`.

Since `input` evaluates to a string, you can use it in a larger expression as if it were a string itself.

```python
name = input('what is your name? ') + ' Test'
print('Hello', name, '!')
```
```
>>> what is your name? Joe (((The user types in Joe here)))
>>> Hello Joe Test!
```

The `input` evaluates to `'Joe'`, `'Joe' + ' Test'` evaluates to `'Joe Test'`.
